# APackOfTheClones 1.1.0.9000 (development version)

## Additions

- Add argument `detail` in `APOTCPlot` and `vizAPOTC` to allow user to plot a version of the clonal expansion plot where each cluster is just one large circle. Correspondingly added a subsection in `vignette("APackOfTheClones-shared")`.

## Changes

- All arguments in `AdjustAPOTC` that asks for cluster indices as input now also accept characters representing their respective labels in the APackOfTheClones runs.
- The argument `recolor_indicies` has been renamed to `recolor_indices` in `AdjustAPOTC`.
- Several exported functions now have stricter argument checking of type and length.

# APackOfTheClones 1.1.0

## Additions

- Add `getSharedClones` to compute information about clonotypes that are present in multiple seurat clusters and return it to the user.
- Add `showCloneHighlight` to extend the scRepertoire analogue for an APackOfTheClones plot - comes with many options to have certain clones appear differently on an existing plot.
- Add `overlayLegend` to overlay/modify current legend on a clonal expansion plot.
- Add `removeLegend` to remove any existing legend on a clonal expansion plot.
- Add `mergeCloneSizes` to merge clustered raw clone sizes into one table.
- Added arguments in `countCloneSizes` to optionally NOT get clones sizes by cluster, and to optionally sort the output.
- Added argument `add_legend_centerspace` in `APOTCPlot` and `vizAPOTC` to adjust spacing between guide circles and their values, for cases where guide circles have an exceedingly large radius.
- Added arguments in `AdjustAPOTC` to work with labels and their locations
- Added argument `verbose` in `APOTCPlot` to display some additional visual cues.
- Added argument `alpha` in `APOTCPlot` and `vizAPOTC` to change the alpha (transparency) of each circle.
- Added arguments in `APOTCPlot` and the corresponding `vizAPOTC` to compute and plot "links" between clonotypes that are "shared" i.e. common within multiple clusters. Currently, only supports plotting of straight lines.
- Add `vignette("APackOfTheClones-install")` for detailed installation instructions.
- Add `vignette("APackOfTheClones-utils")` for more guidance on the various utilities of the package.
- Add `vignette("APackOfTheClones-shared")` for guidance on working with and visualizing clonotypes shared among different seurat clusters.

## Changes

- `countCloneSizes`
    - Fixed the output to truly be a list of unnamed "table" objects, whereas before, for the clusters with valid clones, each element was instead a list with the first and only element being the tabled clone sizes, and they also had a dimname of `"x"`.
    - Fixed a bug where if the seurat object had no actual clones, the function would error instead of returning a list of empty tables.
    - These fixed changed the raw clone size objects stored in `ApotcData` objects, so all objects and pipelines used before this *must* be re-ran to be forwards compatible! This is technically a breaking change but the major version was not incremented since the fix should be relatively trivial.
- For `vizAPOTC`, `RunAPOTC`, `APOTCPlot`, fixed the subsetting arguments `...` and `extra_filter` for cases where setting certain columns to only one level will erase extra data.
- Altered the ggplot object outputs of `APOTCPlot` and `vizAPOTC` to work with `overlayLegend` and `removeLegend` by introducing another element with a smaller size `ApotcData` object, and layers are now either named with an empty string or a layer label. Leftover ggplot objects from previous versions will have to be updated by re-running that command (`APOTCPlot`/`vizAPOTC`) that generated them.
- Fixed the functionality of the `new_clone_scale_factor` argument in `AdjustAPOTC` to guarantee it is a true rescaling of the clone scale factor, and the internally estimated cluster radii will correspondingly be modified to work with potential repulsion.
- Circles on legends of clonal expansion plots will now have the same linetype as the rest of the circles in a plot generated by `APOTCPlot`/`vizAPOTC`, whereas before they were forced to be blank.
- Legend background is now a single `geom_rect` annotation with a black border instead of a white rectangle stacked on top of a black rectangle.
- Many fixes to the behavior of `AdjustAPOTC`

# APackOfTheClones 1.0.0

## Additions

- Add `vizAPOTC` to replace `clonal_expansion_plot` with some similar arguments but works completely differently with an additional set of argument requirements, to ultimately produce a similar but better visualization.
- Add `RunAPOTC` to store multiple APackOfTheClones runs on the seurat object.
- Add `containsApotcRun` to check for the existence of some run based on an ID.
- Add `getApotcDataIds` to get all APackOfTheClones run IDs.
- Add `getLastApotcDataId` to get the latest APackOfTheClones run ID.
- Add `deleteApotcData` to delete all data associate with some APackOfTheClones run.
- Add `APOTCPlot` to plot APackOfTheClones run results into a ggplot.
- Add `AdjustAPOTC` to modify certain attributes of prior APackOfTheClones runs.
- Add `countCloneSizes` as a convenience function to count clonotype sizes based on the clonecall and allows subsetting of the seurat metadata
- Add `getReductionCentroids` as a convenience function to get the physical centroids of each cell in some reduction in a seurat object.
- Added two new vignettes are on the `pkgdown` website and indexed, and should be viewed in order of `vignette("APackOfTheClones")` and `vignette("APackOfTheClones-runs")`.

## Changes

- ***ALL v0.1.x functions are deprecated/defunct***, and the clonal expansion workflow has changed.
- The latest version two of `scRepertoire` is now a "dependency", and the package is now structured as an extension of `scRepertoire` when it comes to integrating VDJ data, as `scRepertoire` already possesses a mature and common method to do so.
- Package startup message has been modified to notify users about the deprecation and breaking changes.
- All clonal expansion plots will no longer have a title for the default theme

# APackOfTheClones 0.1.4 (github release)

## Additions

- The clonal expansion plotting function now has a new optional argument `reduction` which now allows the user to choose which reduction the circle clonal clusters should be based on. Defaults to `'umap'` but can now be changed to `'tsne'` or `'pca'` given that they have been ran already on the seurat object. The vignette has been updated accordingly as well
- New CRAN badge showing date of latest release on `README.md`

## Changes

- Some testcases have been altered/fixed to pass CRAN's R-CMD check
- Package startup message has been improved

# APackOfTheClones 0.1.3

## Additions

- `clonal_expansion_plot` now displays time elapsed if `verbose = TRUE`
- There are now package startup messages

## Changes

- Many functions have been rewritten in C++, improving the circle packing runtime of `clonal_expansion_plot` 70 ~ 140 fold. For reference, for a dataset with around 2500 viable T cells, the runtime averages 0.1s

# APackOfTheClones 0.1.2

## Additions

- Two new datasets previously in the test folder have now moved to `\data` and are available to users and can be called via `data("mini_seurat_obj")` and `data("mini_clonotype_data")`.

## Changes

- Released package to CRAN.
- Minor documentation changes to adhere to CRAN standards.

# APackOfTheClones 0.1.1 (github release)

## Additions

- A preliminary user vignette can be viewed on the documentation website, but not locally.

## Changes

- An initial version of automated cluster repulsion is correctly implemented and the related arguments in `clonal_expansion_plot` has been "unlocked".
- Size legends are now correctly implemented, and the related arguments have also been "unlocked" in `clonal_expansion_plot`.
- Function documentation and the README in general has been slightly improved. (automatically updated on the pkgdown website)

# APackOfTheClones 0.1.0 (github release)

Initial semi-stable release. The main functions of the package are working with their default parameters. The package currently exports three functions:

- `integrate_tcr`
- `count_clone_sizes`
- `clonal_expansion_plot`

All of which have documentation, including on the documentation site.

Currently, Automated cluster repulsion uses a highly flawed mathematical formula loosely based on force directed graph drawing techniques, the resulting plots are not presentable and the function has been disabled temporarily
